Geography 311 class at the home of Mary Lancaster
303 Dexter College Station. Mary Lancaster 303
Dexter College Station. This is for the Geography
311 class.
I'm interviewing Mary Lancaster, and she's going
to give us a short biographical sketch before we
begin the interview. Thank you, Becky. I was born
Mary Laverne Whiteside in Teague, Texas, which is
in Freestone County. In 1930, I was born to Matty
Ora and Talmadge Whiteside. who had lived in Texas
all of their lives, who had been married for 22
years without children, and finally, in their
middle age, had one child. I lived in Freestone
County for several years and then moved to
Normandy, Texas, which is in Leon County, when I
was eight. and lived there until I finished high
school. Then I went to Baylor University for four
years, and then came to Bryan and College Station
to work as a Girl Scout Executive Director. Here I
met my husband, who had lived here all of his life,
and we were married. I married William B.
Lancaster, and we have now had three children. And
we live at 303 Dexter and College Station and have
lived here almost all of our married life and hope
to the rest of our lives. Okay. How many or how long
has your family been in this general area? My
grandparents and their parents came to Texas.
They came either from Alabama, or Mississippi,
soon after the Civil War. Most often came, I
suppose, because most of everything they had
worked for was destroyed there, or the frontier
here seemed more profitable. One group of
great-grandparents came to Arkansas and settled
for about 10 years, and then came on to Texas.
leaving four little children buried in Arkansas,
I remember. Then another set of
great-grandparents came from Mississippi down
and settled in the lower eastern part of Texas,
which is now Beaumont. They settled there for a few
years, but because the climate was so humid and
damp and they felt it was not healthy, They sold
their land there for a penny an acre, just as a legal
transaction, and moved up to Leon County, where
they have lived since that time. And now that's
where the Beaumont oil wells are.
Oh, goodness.
So then your relatives were from, originally,
like the Deep Sound. Yes, from Mississippi and
Alabama, and then prior to that, most of them came
from the Carolinas before that time. Okay, could
you compare how your father and, like, say, your
grandfather or even great-grandfather made
their livings? Yes. Now, when those, the, my
father... made his living, he was raised on the
farm. I believe the acreages that were given out as
land grants were about 108 acres each. And both my
mother's family and my father's family had a
108-acre plot. I suppose they homesteaded this
land. I don't know if they had to pay for it or if it
was given to them. But they were both raised on this
land. There they raised almost everything that
they used. They were almost self-sufficient.
This little community where they grew up is about
35 miles from Brownlee. And twice each year, they
would come in wagons to get the supplies that they
had to have other than what they grew on their
farms. Now, their principal income, I think, was
cotton. They could raise two to three to four bales
of cotton a year. This is hand planted, hand
cultivated, hand picked cotton done by the family
itself. maybe some corn for their livestock. They
had fruit trees, large gardens, chickens, and
beef and pork that they raised for themselves. The
only things they really needed to buy were flour
and sugar and coffee and candy. this sort of thing.
So they grew up in a rural community where they did
everything they could themselves as far as their
own livelihood. Then my father and my mother left
the farm soon after they were married and my father
did various jobs all throughout his life. He had
only an elementary education, and he lived in
different areas.
They lived in Dallas and where I was born in
Freestone County and then back in Madison and Leon
County. All their lives, he did many things.
He owned several grocery stores. He owned several
service stations. He worked as a very young man as
an ice delivery boy in Dallas. He worked in a tin
shop as a young man. Finally, in his later years, he
was a wholesale distributor for Mobil Air, most of
my growing up years. enjoyed this very much.
Before he went with Mobil in the 30s, I believe it
was the late 20s or early 30s, there was an oil field
which came into being in East Texas around Kilgore
and Longview. And with the coming of this oil well,
they produced cheaper gasoline than the major oil
companies. And He was in business for himself for
several years during the Depression. My family
was not really affected as much as a lot of others
because he used this opportunity. He had his own
wholesale truck and he had a chain of service
stations that he serviced with this cheaper
gasoline that people needed very much at the time
of the Depression. and made quite a bit of money at
that time for the times. Well, in general, how do
you feel that the Depression affected this
general area? Do you have any sort of feeling about
that? Well, I can remember the Depression very
well, or the times. I know people were so much more
conservative in their living.
There were a lot of people roaming the country at
that time, just as they were termed tramps. You
never hear that word much anymore, but they were
single men who were out of work. So many, you'd see
them on the highways, and you'd see them riding on
trains and boxcars, and they would just go from
town to town looking for work or looking for...
something to eat i can remember many people coming
to my mother's back door not never the front but to
the back of the back door and asked for something to
eat and my mother felt that maybe they were contact
points in a town that because she had so many that
maybe one would tell another But she never refused
anybody anything to eat. But you never see this
type thing now. And they were white men. I never
remember seeing a black person going from door to
door asking for something to eat. I remember one
Sunday in particular, it was about 1936.
someone knocked at our back door, and my mother
went to the door, and it was a young man in his
mid-twenties, and asked if he might have
something to eat. My mother, of course, never let
someone in the house, because she was afraid to,
and my dad was gone. And she latched the door,
screaming, and of course, at that day, there was so
much less violence than there is now. and she fixed
him a sandwich or something to eat and as he turned
to walk away she could see that all of his pockets
filled with something to eat that he was stocking
up from or maybe he was getting something for a
friend but um the depression it's hard for me to say
it didn't affect my family Because of this
opportunity that my dad took at that time, we
probably lived as well or better during the
Depression as any other time in my life. But
others, I know, were affected, and it made an
entirely different kind of atmosphere with the
people. I think it was a real sobering, had a real
sobering effect on the people, which we may need
some of that today. Okay, do you remember anything
about, like, the type of house your grandparents
lived in, you know, as compared to the house that
you grew up in? Yes. Now, my daddy's, in fact, my
daddy was born in a log cabin. His father built this
log cabin when they came to Texas from Arkansas. I
don't know if it was a one room, or I think it was, but
it was very, very well constructed, my dad said,
because he tore it down later. And he worked, it was
put together with pegs, or in some way, it was
almost impossible to tear it down. But he was born
in this log cabin, and I do think it had just a dirt
floor. And this is where they lived. when they
first came to Texas. And then after, I don't know
how long a period of time, I suppose whenever the
time permitted for them to build a better house.
But the type of houses they lived in, they were
wooden houses with usually just one or two large
rooms with a fireplace. And then sometimes the
kitchens were detached so that you stepped down
and then back up into this other room for the
kitchen. I can remember seeing a house with a
detached kitchen. And I believe an elderly aunt of
mine lived in it. And for the step between the main
house and the kitchen, there was a big tree stump,
big round tree stump. And you step down on that. and
then back up into the kitchen. And I'm not sure what
the purpose of this was, unless it was the heat in
the summer to keep the other house from being so
hot. Or if it was for sanitary purposes, I'm not
sure. But I can remember my dad telling how much fun
it was as a little boy to watch the men build
chimneys. And any time someone needed a house
built in the community, All the men went and helped
the women cook food. It was just a real fun time to do
this. But the most fun was the chimney. They were
mud chimneys made with moss off the trees. They'd
make mud, a big wet mud bat, and then take what he
called little bats. They would make the mud bats.
They would probably be about the size of a brick
now, or maybe not as thick. But they'd take moss and
dip it into this mud and form it as best they could
into some kind of a solid and put it out to dry. Or
maybe they didn't even dry it. They may have just
stacked it. Mm-hmm. On poles, on the frame, they'd
build a chimney frame, and the moss would hold the
mud together. And they'd stack them on the
chimney, and I suppose it dried then to solidify
it. And they had coated it on the outside with mud.
And how this kept from washing away, I don't know.
Maybe they put something on it to keep it from it.
But their houses were, the floors, I know he said,
were just sort of rough. wood, all the lumber was
real rough in that day. The floors were rough, and
the way his mother cleaned the floors, she would
put sand in sometimes on the floors at certain
times of the year for special house cleaning, and
had a real strong broom, and they would scour with
the sand and wash it away, and this would help sand
the roughness of the floors, and over a period of
years, the floors would get smooth. You know. Oh.
But their houses were all very, very simple wood
houses with a porch across the front. And
sometimes there would be holes in the floors and
they were not airtight. And the fireplace was
usually their only source of heat. Is that the type
of house you grew up in? No. Now here's when I Of
course, we had, by that time,
there were all the conveniences, the indoor
bathrooms, the electricity,
gas heating, that sort of thing, and carpeting.
Oh, so you grew up in a more modern-time house. A
modern-time house. Now, I grew up in a very small
community, and the houses were not... not as nice
of course as they are today. But they were very
comfortable. I see. We used space heaters in the
house where I grew up. Space gas heaters. There was
no central heating and there was no air
conditioning. And I think the real luxury that I
can remember as a child was being able to have an
electric fan on when you slept at night. That was
the most luxurious thing you could have. The
heating was very modern by that time, but the
electric air conditioning didn't come into
being. It was not really prevalent until I was
homeschooled. What types of general changes has
there been in, say, livelihood activities from
the time you grew up to the present? Are there more
people or fewer people farming? Or if there are
fewer people, what are these other people doing?
Just the general types of occupation. When I was
growing up, there were... very few occupations to
choose from if you what I mean your choice of
occupation was very limited whereas now a young
person going to college has so many choices that it
probably is hard for them to decide what to do but
choices were very very limited and in my area uh
farming and ranching ranching became more
popular than farming as I was growing up because
the price of beef began to go up after the
Depression and during World War II and later. And
people did really become quite wealthy off of beef
cattle in my day just simply because they did have
the land. I can remember the transition from
farming to ranching. they introduced coastal
Bermuda grass into this part of the country. In
fact, my husband's father was a grass specialist,
and he brought both St. Augustine and coastal
Bermuda into this country. But that made such a
difference in cattle raising, and people began to
improve their land to fertilize their grass and to
sprig it with coastal Bermuda. This was an
expensive process at that time, it seemed. But
people began doing this and improving fences. And
until now, that little rural community over there
is just a beautiful area with such beautiful brick
homes. And their land is so well cared for. Where at
one time it had been the part that was not used for
farming had just been thicket or not good for
anything. But the people had cleared it with large
equipment, heavy equipment, and left just enough
trees for shade. And it sprigged with coastal
Bermuda. And that whole area almost is ranching
now. And Rockport's right at the moment. The price
of beef has gone down, so this has really hurt them,
and I'm sure this is probably a temporary thing.
Can you think of any other techniques or
innovations in farming or ranching, you know,
that have really made a big, big difference
besides the new grasses? Like different types of
irrigation? Now there were a few cotton farmers
still left over in that part of the country and of
course around here we still had cotton farmers and
now you have to be You have to operate on a pretty
large scale if you're in the cotton business.
There are no more small cotton farmers. And
irrigation has really helped in this area as far as
cotton is concerned. They control the growth. And
of course the mechanization of the kickers. So
they can operate on just very large scales. And the
cotton industry is controlled by just a few
families who still operate that type of thing. And
with cattle, of course inoculations and the
improvement of feed. and that sort of thing. Now,
something interesting that over where I grew up,
there were people who raised hogs. And they raised
them in parts of the country that were just real
wooded, that was not really good for anything
else. And people, I know some people who became
wealthy off of these wild hogs. They bred in there,
and they had no care During the year, they lived off
of acorns and whatever else they could scrounge
for food because they were a hardy type, almost
wild animal. And then at certain times of the year,
once or maybe twice, they'd go in there and round up
those hogs and take them to market and sell them.
And the meat was not nearly so good as the corn-fed
or... But back in my youth, this was not as
important as it is now. And people, this was just
clear profit. All you had to do was, if you could
manage to keep from getting killed by them, you'd
round them up and take them in, and it would make
quite a profit if you had a large herd of hogs that
you had in the market.
Coming into town only twice a year for all your
supplies and then not coming back. Well, my dad had
so many interesting things to tell. It was just the
highlight of the year to come to Bryan. They came in
wagons. I'm not sure if they were covered or plain,
probably depending on whether it was what type of
year, what kind of time of year it was. But it would
take all day. to drive to Brown in a wagon. And Brown
at that time had a large wagon yard on the north end
near Main Street, the north end of the business
district there. And wagons that came in would park
there and spend the night. And then you could shop
and visit around town. And my dad talks, my dad's
father died when he was two, but he had some grown
brothers and sisters. My daddy was born when his
youngest sister was 17 years old. So he was quite an
afterthought. And his brothers, he grew up with
brothers and their families, with his mother. But
he tells of the time that his brother brought him
and his little nephew, who was about his age. to
Brian and with others, and they saw their first
train coming to Brian, and he said it was the
biggest thing he'd ever seen with lights, and that
his brother had to hold their hands so tight to keep
them from running away. They were so scared of the
train, but that was the most exciting thing.
Something my dad said that I remember, that when he
grew up out in the country, There was no sound.
There was no noise. And in his later years, he felt
that the noises of day-to-living really affected
people in their personalities. That he could play
all day long outside and never hear anything
except locusts or crickets or birds. There were no
sounds. There was not even a train whistle from
where he lived. There was no noise. And the
people's personalities were much calmer, much,
they were just real different. And as he grew
older, keep the noise of everything we do, the
children who grow up with noise always in their
home, with TVs, with stereos, radios, this must
affect their personalities. I never thought
about how quiet it must have been. My dad tells
about the time, talking about the cotton. They
would bring their cotton. They would have to carry
their cotton to cotton gins. At some point, they
didn't bring them all the way to Brine,
but they would take them, it would be quite a ways to
the nearest cotton gin, several miles. So when
they would get them, wagon full of cotton. They
would tie cotton sheet over it to protect it until
they were ready to take it to the gym, which might be
a day or two later. And my daddy's grandmother came
from Alabama in her very late years to live with my
daddy and his mother. And she had become senile.
And at that time, there was no place, nothing that
you could do for mental patients, or very few
places to handle mental patients. And she was
just, as we know now, it's just hardening of the
arteries, and had become senile. And they had a a
room, one of the rooms in the house that they
boarded the windows and fixed so that if she got to
the front door, she began talking about running
away, they could put her in there and lock her up if
they had to do something and work if they weren't
able to watch her all the time so they know she
wouldn't get lost. And she lived with them for
several years. And my dad talked, she must have
been in her 80s or quite elderly, but he said she
could run like a deer. And if she wanted to get away,
Then he would have, it was his job, if she ever got
away from him, she'd just decide all of a sudden
that she didn't always want to run away, but there
were times when she was going to do something and
they'd try to keep her from going and then she'd
run. And they had barbed wire fences. And he said
she could just outrun him and run and get to a barbed
wire fence and lie down and roll under it and jump up
on the other side and run off. And when he did catch
her, He'd have to get her back through that chance.
And she was such a hard thing to handle. But as he
grew up as a little boy, this was one of the part of
his life. Well, then this was his mother's mother.
Then his father's father came from Arkansas for a
period of time and lived with him. And he was a very
old man. And he was, in his old age, he was a basket
weaver. And he loved to, and he made a little bit of
money along selling baskets because at times they
picked cotton in baskets. And they used them for
all sorts of things on the farms. And people would
buy them from him. And he watched them as a little
boy. And he would go out into the wooded area and
pick out a small tree and bring it home. And then he
would strip it into very thin strips. He would peel
thin strips of wood off this tree down to the very
middle. And then he'd soak the strips of wood in
something until they were soft, and he made
baskets. And the basket man, my
great-grandfather, was married three times. He
outlived three wives. And by the last marriage he
had of his last child,